Cwm Parc Tales
Dai the ram
Dai was not a person of some form of sexual prediction,
but a four-legged fleeced horned animal that belonged to Dan Prince
whose farm was below the park colliery Cwm Parc.
Dai lived on the park top picktop,
not a blade of grass in sight,
but Dai lived off what the boys had empty from their tummy boxes as they came up to the picktop.
Dai was quite a distinguished animal,
who would on occasion sit on his lap rump like a dog.
His friss was changed from where he stayed near the brazier.
The brazier fire kept to keep picktop workers' hands warm
when they were handling chains and clamps and things like that from cold rams.
To make sure Dai was not harmed in the night,
the men had painted his homes neumonous white so they knew where Dai was.
Dai was king of the picktop, big, strong.
When the pit closed, what happened to Dai?
Did Dai go back to farm life? Who knows?
That's another story.
The name of the ramps, that gives the meaning to of rampage.
The translator
When the collieries closed, some men went to work in the EMI factory in Triochi.
EMI made radios and telephones, etc.
One of the main supporters, importers, was Germany.
Sometimes when they had a problem, they would phone Triochi.
The factory phoned the school, request for German speakers.
No luck. French? Yes. Spanish? Yes.
Welsh? Yes. English? Yes.
Latin? Yes. German? No.
The factory asked a ride for anyone who spoke German.
One of the workers called Ivan for convenience, said he had served in Germany for years just after the war.
Anyway, once more Germany phoned the factory to say they had a problem.
So the factory sent to the factory floor to get Ivan to the offices.
They all waited rather pleased that they had a local with German phrases.
Ivan picked up the phone and said in a loud voice,
What do you want?
Pit ponies
Pit ponies lived underground 24 hours a day, 70s a week, 50 weeks of the year.
Their hostlers changed with every shift, but the ponies stayed underground.
Except when the mines were on holidays, two weeks each summer,
their hostlers brought them down to the fields around the Götze stones on the main day.
By golly, when they were left into the field, they ran and jumped and kneed and chased one another.
Such horse happiness!
If it were a beautiful summer, the hostlers had a heck of a job to get them back in to go to work.
But if it had been a wet, wet summer, they gave up gladly.
Fflaen a thais yn rôl, pryd o roedd y pwll tlaid glo cael ei gilyddau,
roedd y bwys cwmp arc wedi'i gwneud pwll dôr o flaen y pwll glo park.
Roedd pawb yn galw y pwrst dôr, the dam.
Roedd y dam yn atherchog i wneud i o'n nofio yn y dôr.
Am beth waith roedd y mraw John a fi mynd lan i'r dam i'n nofio gyda'r bechgen eraill.
Pan oeddwn yn dod yn ôl at y te, roedd mam yn ddweud,
a'i ddwy bachgen Cymraeg mynd lan i'r dam i'n nofio,
ond roedd dwy bachgen o China wedi dod yn ôl, roedd y gwas ac roedd John a fi sawl o mud meiling y dam.